This draft Constitution for the United Kingdom consists of 129
Articles and 6 schedules, accompanied by a commentary which
explains the derivation and purpose of each provision. The main
features of the Constitution are as follows:
(1) The Constitution is the sole source of authority for all public
action, executive, legislative or judicial. Henceforth authority
must be sought not in common law principles such as parliamentary
sovereignty or prerogative power, nor in constitutional conventions,
such as ministerial responsibility, but in the written
provisions of this Constitution. (Article 1)
(2) The Constitution is placed in the context of the United Kingdom’s
international and European commitments. (Article 1).
Specific commitment to European Community Law is provided
under Article 50 and to international obligations under Article
51.
(3) The Constitution incorporates a Bill of Rights based on the European
Convention on Human Rights and on the United Nations
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to both of
which the United Kingdom is signatory, and provides the means
for its enforcement (Articles 2 to 26). It also includes a
declaratory statement of Social and Economic Rights (Article
27) and public rights of access to official information and
controls on the use of personal information by public authorities.
(Articles 28 and 29).
(4) British nationality is defined, together with the rules governing
the acquisition and loss of British nationality, allegiance and dual
nationality, and the civic rights of non-nationals (Articles 30 to
33).
(5) The position of the Queen as Head of State is confirmed but the
    residual prerogative powers of the Monarchy (eg over the appointment
    of the Prime Minister) are removed and the Monarchy
    becomes a wholly dignified part of the Constitution (Articles 34
    to 39).
(6) The prerogative powers exercised by the Executive are defined
in the Constitution and subjected to Parliamentary control: eg the
making of treaties (Article 51), the declaration of war (Article
122), deployment of the Armed Forces (Article 123), national
security (Article 126) and declarations of emergency (Article
128).Substantial areas of patronage are removed from the Executive
by transferring powers of appointment from Ministers to
the Public Services Commission (Article 115) and a Judicial Appointments
Commission for the United Kingdom and Judicial
Services Commissions for England and Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland (Articles 102 and 103).
(7) The Prime Minister is elected by the House of Commons and is
subject to a personal vote of no confidence which does not
involve the dissolution of the House. The Prime Minister appoints
a deputy, Ministers and the Cabinet. Ministers are required
to give a statement of their responsibilities to Parliament on
taking office and are bound by a Code of Conduct (Articles 40 to
46)
(8) The House of Commons is elected for a fixed term of four years,
with the possibility of dissolution but with no extension of the
term of Parliament (Article 60).
(9) The House of Lords is replaced by an elected Second Chamber
(Article 57), also elected for a four year term, but at a two year
interval from the election for the House of Commons, and not
subject to dissolution (Article 60 and Schedule 3).
(10) Both Houses have a smaller membership than at present and both
are to be elected by forms of Proportional Representation: the
House of Commons by a variant of the Additional Member
System and the Second Chamber by the Single Transferable Vote
(Articles 83 to 86 and Schedule 3).
(11) The House of Commons retains its present supremacy in relation
to financial and general legislation, but the Second Chamber has
equal powers concerning amendments to the Constitution and to
constitutional legislation, that is statutes which give effect to or
have a direct bearing on provisions of the Constitution, eg
election law or matters arising from the Bill of Rights (Articles
65 to 70).
(12) Legislative power is shared between Parliament and elected
Assemblies for Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and twelve
English regions. Parliament retains exclusive rights over those
matters normally retained for the central government in federal
Constitutions, while the Assemblies’ powers are based on the
Northern Ireland Constitution Act 1973 and the present executive
responsibilities of the Scottish Office (Articles 52 to 54).
Parliament retains concurrent powers to legislate on matters
where legislation by an Assembly would be inadequate or would
have adverse effects outside its boundaries (Article 55).
(13) The Assemblies are to be financed by an entitlement to the
proceeds of the personal income tax, distributed according to an
entrenched formula based on population, with power to vary the
standard rate of tax at the margin. The income tax would
continue to be a United Kingdom tax set by Parliament and
administered by the Inland Revenue. (Article 80 and Schedule 2)
(14) The Constitution requires that each Assembly shall establish
elected local authorities but leaves the details of their functions
and organization to the Assemblies in order to recognise the
different circumstances of the nations and regions and to encourage
diversity. Local authorities are given by the Constitution
the right to levy rates on domestic and commercial property.
(Article 82)
(15) A number of independent bodies are established to administer
and monitor constitutional matters:
a. A Human Rights Commission to promote the public understanding
of human rights, to investigate breaches of the Bill
of Rights, to assist with individual complaints about the violation
of rights, and to challenge legislation which is inconsistent
with the Bill of Rights (Article 26).
b. A Constitutional Commission based in Parliament with the
responsibility to monitor constitutional developments, to
publish codes of conduct for elected officials, and through a
separate committee to investigate the conduct of Ministers
and other elected officials (Articles 76 and 77).
c. An Electoral Commission charged with responsibility for
constituency boundaries at all levels from the European
Parliament to local authorities: for keeping under review the
workings of the electoral system including campaigning and
election finance; for the investigation of complaints about
the conduct of elections; and for the registration of political
parties (Articles 88 to 91).
d. A Judicial Appointments Commission to make recommendations
for the appointment to the Supreme Court (Article
102) and Judicial Services Commissions for England
and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, to make judicial
appointments, and to investigate complaints of judicial misconduct;
and Judicial Councils to advise the Minister of
Justice on the administration of justice (Articles 103 to 105).
e. A Public Services Commission to establish and monitor
standards and codes of conduct for the public services and to
make public appointments outside the regular civil service
(Articles 115 and 116); and a Public Services Complaints
Commission to investigate complaints into breaches of
codes or regulations, malversation of a public service or
improper conduct towards officials by Ministers or other
elected executives (Article 117).
f. A Commission for Public Administration to investigate
complaints of failures of administration or unfair administration,
to investigate the conduct and practices of public
authorities, to review the constitution and workings of tribunals
and inquiries, and to promote standards of good administration
(Article 119).
(16) A written Constitution gives a much greater role to the Judiciary
and we have therefore given particular attention to the reorganisation
of the administration of justice and the independence of
the Judiciary. There is to be a Supreme Court for the United
Kingdom, appointed on the recommendation of a United Kingdom
Judicial Appointments Commission, with original and
exclusive jurisdiction in any proceeding concerning the validity
of Parliamentary or Assembly legislation brought by the Government
of the United Kingdom or an Assembly Executive; and
appellate jurisdiction in other constitutional matters. The office
of Lord Chancellor will cease to exist and his functions in
relation to the legal system are taken over by a Minister of J ustice
(Articles 96 to 100). The Attorney General becomes a non political
legal adviser to the Government (Article 47).
These Articles and the many other provisions of the Constitution are
more fully discussed in the Commentary which follows the text of the
Constitution itself. The second part of the introduction gives a general
account of some of the constitutional and political considerations
which lie behind the detailed proposals we have made.
II
New Constitutions are generally bom of crisis, political upheaval, the
struggle for independence and the breakdown of regimes. Few appear
to have arisen from peaceful and orderly reflection on the shortcomings
of an existing and still functioning predecessor. With events in the
Soviet Union and South Africa before us, we do well to be sceptical
about claims of a constitutional crisis in the United Kingdom and to
keep a sense of proportion about our present discontents. Nevertheless
they are real and there is no harm, and may be virtue, in trying to
analyse present difficulties and to anticipate the problems to which
they will give rise. Membership of the European Community has
already raised constitutional issues of profound importance, to which
we in the United Kingdom have made no ready or coherent response.
The present Government and its predecessor have launched far reaching
changes in the organisation of Whitehall and of local government
with scant consideration for their constitutional implications. The
major opposition parties are committed to further changes, particularly
with regard to Scotland, which would also have serious implications
for current constitutional practice should they come to pass.
There has over the last twenty years been a growing chorus of
complaint about aspects of British government which in any other
system would be recognised as constitutional: that is, complaints of an
electoral system which seriously distorts representation, excludes
middle opinion, and threatens to perpetuate rule by the largest minority
party; of a Parliament which is dominated by the executive through its
control of procedure and the disciplines of party, patronage and the
press, and which therefore fails to scrutinise effectively the conduct of
government or to play any constructive role in legislation; of a national
administration which practices excessive secrecy and against whose
actions there is inadequate redress; of a local government which is at
once the dependent of and the scapegoat for central government and
which enjoys little support either in Parliament or among the electorate;
of security services which are protected from Parliamentary
scrutiny and which appear when the veil is briefly twitched aside to be
barely under the control of Ministers; of a police force which has
appeared increasingly in a political role, which has little accountability,
which has absorbed more and more resources while crime rates
rise, and whose reputation for probity has been sadly dented.
For each of these ills there is a specific remedy: electoral reform, more
powers for select committees and a reformed Second Chamber, Freedom
of Information, the restructuring of local government (again) and
devolution, a Bill of Rights or incorporation of the European Convention
on Human Rights, and other proposals for the statutory protection
of privacy, the control of the security services, the strengthening of
employment rights and of anti-discrimination measures brought together
in Labour’s Charter o f Rights. What has emerged over the last
three or four years is a growing interest across the political spectrum
in bringing these separate complaints together. This reflects a common
understanding of the underlying problem which is best expressed in
Dunning’s famous motion of 1780: “the power of the executive has
increased, is increasing and ought to be diminished.” A more recent
statement of the problem may be found in The Scottish Claim o f Right
(1988): “The English Constitution provides for only one source of
power: the Crown-in-Parliament. That one source is now mainly
embodied in the Prime Minister, who has appropriated almost all the
royal prerogatives . . . In fact, if not in theory, the Prime Minister is
Head of State, Chief Executive, and Chief Legislator, and while in
office is not circumscribed by any clear or binding constitutional
limitations. Against this there is in the United Kingdom not a single
alternative source of secure constitutional power at any level”. Political
power there certainly is. Even if it speaks indirectly through the
Gothick Constitution of the Conservative Party, the electorate has the
last word.
Entrenchm ent
But this is not constitutional power and it is the belief that restraints on
the executive and on the centralisation of power must be given
constitutional rather than political force that has become the common
theme of reformers. The need for the entrenchment of rights both for
individuals and for devolved governments implies a constitutional
document. This has been for long the view of the Liberal Democrats
and their predecessors and has been given outline expression in their
Federal Green Paper No 13: We the People . . . Towards a Written
Constitution. It is the theme of Charter 88, which has evoked such a
remarkable response. It is at least implicit in the proceedings of the
Scottish Convention. And it has been given an interesting dimension
in recent work of the Institute for Economic Affairs as a protection
against the encroachments of the European Community. There is one
reforming voice not in harmony with this chorus, that of Mr Tony
Benn, whose Commonwealth of Britain Bill attacks many of the same
targets. But Mr Benn is a traditional radical, a robust defender of
Parliamentary supremacy and no friend to Kings, Lords, priests or
judges.
Here we approach the heart of the matter: particular reforms may be
important and interesting. But the essential question is whether the
time has come not to change the historical constitution incrementally
as has been done in the past, but to change the basis of the Constitution.
That is, to change from a single fundamental principle, the supremacy
of Parliament, which is founded in custom and usage as recognised by
the courts, to a fundamental law which is prior to, independent of and
the source of authority for the system of government. A codification of
existing practice and convention might be convenient, but it would not
be enough. It is the peculiarity of our Constitution not that it is not
codified, but that the laws which make it up, whether statute, common
or case law have no special status. Parliament can make and unmake
them as it chooses; a million British subjects can be deprived of their
rights of abode by the same means as an alteration of the speed limit.
Essential features of the Constitution have no basis in law at all.
All constitutions depend for their working on conventions and informal
understandings: there is no machine which goes of itself. B ut in our
case conventions govern essential constitutional issues, such as the
Sovereign’s use of her powers, the rules for the formation of governments
and the dissolution of Parliament, the meaning of Ministerial
responsibility to Parliament, or the organisation of the civil service and
the duties of civil servants. All these are governed by convention and
the beauty of conventions is that we do not know whether or how they
will apply until they are put to the test. The one thing we can be certain
of is the supremacy of Parliament, which can in theory do anything it
likes: there is no part of the Constitution that cannot be changed by
ordinary Parliamentary procedures. Where else could a Government
confidently embark on a comprehensive review of local authorities,
their finance, structure, functions and internal management, to be
undertaken in a matter of weeks without any public discussion of the
options. And this by a Government which by the same process has just
scored a spectacular own goal with the Community Charge.
The much vaunted flexibility of the Constitution suits nobody so much
as an executive which has inherited a reservoir of prerogative powers
and enjoys a dominant position in relation to the legislature and all
other public authorities. In the past these features of the Constitution,
like the party system which exploits them, have been justified on the
grounds that they help to provide firm and effective government.
There is no doubt that single party government has advantages of
cohesion, speed of response and clear locus of responsibility. It is less
clear that it performs any better than other systems in the promotion of
effective and acceptable public policies. There may be some truth in
the view that there would be less concern about the Constitution if the
policies of successive British governments had been more successful.
But there remains a constitutional case for reform: that the protection
of individual rights, the decentralisation of power within the United
Kingdom and the United Kingdom’s role in the development of the
European Community would all be more readily and more satisfactorily
achieved within an explicitly constitutional framework.
Drafting concentrates the mind. It is for this reason that we have chosen
to produce the text of a Constitution rather than another general
discussion of the issues. The fact that we have gone to this trouble does
not mean that we believe that the provisions of this Constitution are the
only or even the ideal answer. Although the proposal for a written
Constitution is in itself radical, much of the content is in the best (or
worst) tradition of gradualism. The main features of the present
Constitution are left more or less intact: in particular the Executive is
drawn from the legislature, with all that entails for party government,
the control of procedure, discipline and the purpose of elections.
Some of the most disturbing effects of these proposals, from the
political point of view, could be achieved by the introduction of
proportional representation for elections by itself, or indeed without it
by the chance of a hung parliament. The supremacy of the Constitution,
however, entails, a problem of a different order: a much greater
constitutional role for the Judiciary.
The involvement of the Judiciary in what are seen as essentially
political issues is probably the strongest ground of objection across the
political spectrum. The problem is that while not all political questions
are constitutional, all constitutional questions are inherently political.
To separate off some questions and declare them fit for judicial